We saw in the 2001 recession, everybody
remembers that as the internet bubble
popped and that caused a recession. As
soon as the growth rate of the internet,
it became clear it's not going to be 20%
a year. Maybe it'll be 5% a year,
there was a huge overhang and and a
collapse of confidence. So, I just want
to caution us on AI. Let's not repeat
that bubble bubble and bust cycle.
So tell us, I feel like we've been
wondering the whole year when we will
start to see tariffs reflected in some
of this inflation data.
>> Well, we said back in April, was it? I
think it was April. It was a thousand
years ago, uh, liberation day. I think
people were saying then that you really
wouldn't see any price impacts from
tariffs until the summer or fall. And I
don't know where where you are uh
audience, but here in New York it is
definitely summer. And it seems like we
are starting to see it in the data a
little bit. It's no more of this
inflation. Is it in the room with us?
Like it's it's kind of knocking at the
door, right?
>> We're having a hot inflation summer.
>> Well, the temperatures outside are
matching the always sweltering
temperatures inside of our studio here
at WSJ's Take on the Week. I'm Telus
Deeos
>> and I'm Gjen Banerjee. Um, I read
recently, uh, somebody said that trying
to get a read on the role of tariff of
of what's going on in inflation, uh,
tariffs were like kicking more dirt into
the air and just sort of muddying the
picture. And the person who said that is
joining us now. He is Austin Goulsby.
He's the president of the Chicago Fed.
So Austin, welcome. Thanks for joining
us.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> So what what are you hearing right now?
What's your read on the Chicago economy?
And does it tell us anything about the
US economy right now?
>> Okay, the district, seventh district is
more than just Chicago. It's basically
90% of Iowa, Michigan,
Indiana, Illinois, and Wisconsin. It's
kind of heart of the Midwest.
>> We're the highest manufacturing
intensity of all the districts and the
highest auto production o of all the
districts.
That historically means we're among the
most cyclical of all places. And if
you're cyclical because of the
manufacturing and durable goods and
things like that, we're a little bit the
canary in the coal mine of the business
cycle. So a lot of times we will pe
people will be interested what are we
hearing in the seventh district because
it's an indicator of where we are in the
business cycle.
They got a little scrambled going
through COVID because it was such a
weird recession. It's been such a weird
period co coming out. That said, going
into April 2nd, before April 2nd,
hair on fire, especially in the auto
industry, but throughout manufacturing
about yikes, if the tariffs are going to
be this big, it's going to disrupt the
supply chain. Then I would characterize
over the summer, late spring and summer,
the impact of tariffs wasn't as big as
they feared. The feeling's been a little
less hair on fire and a little more,
hey, maybe we we got some exemptions.
Maybe they tariffs won't be as big as we
thought.
There's not 100% pass through. were kind
of cost sharing, burden sharing as as
they described it. So we were getting a
little
I guess I would characterize a little
more maybe this is a sustainable
equilibrium
and now I'm hearing more nervousness
again that August 1, another day is
coming. We're going to raise tariffs on
copper 50%.
back to the dynamic that was kind of the
unfortunate dynamic around April 2nd.
You open with my line that we're kicking
dirt in the air. I I thought coming into
April 2nd, we were still on what I was
calling the golden path where we're at
stable full employment.
Inflation coming down to the 2% target
in an environment like that. I've
absolutely thought and continue to think
if we if we can show that we're still on
that path, rates have a fair way to come
down. They they can come down a fair bit
below where they are today. But if we
just keep throwing the dust up in the
air, then it makes it very difficult to
to make sure that you're still on that
path. And you know, the law requires us
anything that affects prices or
employment, the law says we have to look
at it. So that's that's where we are.
>> So Wall Street doesn't seem too
concerned, right? The stock market is at
a record despite some of the recent data
that we've gotten on inflation.
>> The market freaked out at the same time
business and consumers seem to be
freaking out, which was liberation day
and and after. And then the market began
to recover similar with the recovery of
people that I was talking to. They said,
"Yeah, I know." I I said, "You guys told
me that it was going to be the end of
the world, and inflation's been coming
in modestly, and they, yeah, it's not
going to be the end of the world. We
think this could be sustainable." And
what I'm picking up now in in real time,
if you want to think of it that way, is
if we're going to go back through this
same cycle where well, maybe tariffs are
going to be massively higher than than
they were before, maybe there is going
to be 30% tariff put on Canada.
And so now a lot of scrambling to figure
out, well, what are the rules going to
be? It's worth remembering imported
goods are only 11% of US GDP. So there
is a sense in which the US is
overwhelmingly a domestically driven
economy and even substantial tariffs
might not have that material an impact
on the aggregate in the US and the three
places that you should be worried of how
does it jump out of the 11% lane are a
if there's retaliation from other
countries now you just spread it to to
all our exports
B, if you put the tariffs on
intermediate goods and parts and
components and supplies, now you just
jumped it out of its lane and it's
raised the cost of production for
domestic manufacturing. And then three,
the most important, if people start
freaking out, businesses and/or
consumers, and change their behavior,
then the impact of tariffs can get can
can be a lot larger than just the 11%
lane.
We seem to be making progress, it felt
like, on all three of those fronts. o
over the early summer, less freaking
out, more exemptions on intermediate uh
products and and parts and components
and backing down from the escalation and
retaliation cycle.
Last two weeks seems like we've getting
getting a little more back in that lane.
>> You've described your approach and I
think most people at the Fed would
describe themselves this way as sort of
data dependent, right? So, when it comes
to all the things you're talking about,
when it comes to, you know, people
deciding how they're going to vote at
the next Fed meeting or a Fed meeting
later this year, is there anything
data-wise that you're seeing that says
to you that we're on an inflationary
course? Is there anything that has
jumped out to you in the most recent
report, the CPI report for example, that
that would sort of point to you that
okay, all these things are are actually
being seen in the data?
just the impact of tariffs. I do think
you started to see it in the last
inflation report and in this inflation
report, imported goods, um you you're
starting to see pretty significant
accelerations of inflation.
The caveat and why I would took us on
the on a long journey about the 11% lane
of imported goods is it's worth
remembering imported goods aren't that
big of a deal. Okay.
>> And so the fact that we've continued to
make progress on services and on
housing, that's fabulous. That's what I
want to see. And it's entirely possible
that if we don't overdo the price
impacts of tariffs on goods that the
I I'll call it the residual seasonality
that for the last several years kind of
j for Q1 inflation has bumped up but the
later parts of the year we made real
progress on on inflation and if that
continues this time of a magnitude that
kind of drowns out or overwhelms what
what's coming from tariffs, I would feel
good. Like I say, I think underneath
there is still that golden path and we
just need to not get bumped off of it.
>> We're going to take a quick break and
when we come back more with Austin
Goulsby.
Well, I want to drill down on housing
because that is just such a big part of
our economy and you said that you're
encouraged by where prices are heading
in the housing market, but some of the
data has shown that home sales are
slowing down, right? Is that actually a
worrying sign about the economy, what
we're seeing in the housing market, or
is it encouraging because inflation in
housing is not getting out of hand?
>> Yeah, but it's it's all of those. It's
all of those. My reference to what's
encouraging in housing is that the
inflation rate of shelter in the CPI
core housing inflation
has been moderating and that was
for a very long time the biggest puzzle
was why has that been as persistent as
it was and there were as you know there
were a bunch of arguments way down in
the weeds of maybe it's how they're
calculating it and the market measures
the inflation rate already fell so maybe
it's just a matter of time before that
starts to come down that has been coming
down and that's that tends to be a
persistent component. So when you see
improvement in the inflation rate on
core services and core housing that that
doesn't flip around as as as much as
goods can. But I do think that that
transitions us into the important
political dimension of of what's going
on here. You know, the president and a
lot of people around the president would
like the the cost of would like mortgage
rates to come down and one pathway that
some people see towards that is that the
the Fed should be cutting rates. Uh do
you think that that there is a pathway
to lowering mortgage rates through what
the Fed does in its policy and and and
you know is that is that a sensible
economic policy to you?
>> The rules of the FOMC say I'm not
allowed to speak for anybody else on the
committee. I don't speak for the chair.
I don't speak for the committee as a
whole. Just my own opinions. That's all
I'm allowed to talk about.
My observation and you can go look at
the minutes or you can go look at the
word forword transcripts of the FOMC.
What drives the interest rate decisions
is exactly what it should be and that is
the economic conditions and the economic
outlook facing the country. We have a
mandate by law that when we're setting
monetary policy, we're we do two things
and two things only. We're supposed to
stabilize prices and maximize
employment. So, do you think the Federal
Reserve should cut rates at its next
meeting?
>> I I don't like tying our hands before we
get all the data and before I've heard
what what my colleagues say. The most
important thing at this
at the FOMC gatherings and for a central
banker is to figure out the through
line. So it's not about this meeting or
that meeting or what it's to figure out
okay what what is the path we're on and
if we had comfort
if if I had comfort that we're
definitely on the path back to 2% then
as I said I think rates can come down a
fair amount if we have a meeting and
then two days later tariffs are
scheduled to have a massive jump And so
everybody we talk to says, "Yikes, I
think within a month after that, prices
are going to be rising significantly
again." Then we we got to take that into
account, too. And in periods of
uncertainty, you you just got to be a
little careful moving certain ways and
then finding out that you're you're in
the wrong spot.
>> So, you've talked about this dual
mandate, right, between employment and
inflation. What is your read on the
broader economy and some of some of the
jobs reports that we've seen?
>> Pretty good. I mean, I think like I
said, coming into April, I thought on
dual mandate grounds was looking quite
good. We have an unemployment rate
that's around a little above 4% and it's
been stable there for for quite a while.
To me, that's that looks like the kind
of maximum employment full employment
baseline that that we look for. And the
worst thing that that had faced the
economy is no secret. Uh it's that price
inflation got out of control. And we've
spent literally years bringing that back
down. And I felt like it was to me
looked like a path to to get to 2%.
And the added bonus, we've had a real
surge of productivity growth in this
country
>> in the last couple years. And that makes
it that makes everything better. That
makes wages can grow faster without
generating inflation. We can have more
growth. We can raise our standard of
living. So that combination is pretty
positive. And that's what I hope is
underneath there. But I I made the
analogy. It's a at one point I've hired
a trainer at the gym and and the trainer
said, "Ah, you can do this. You can do
sit-ups. You can do push-ups." And I
said, 'Well, how much how much you
lifting? How many sit-ups I got to do to
get a six-pack? And the trainer politely
said, "Everyone has a six-pack
underneath." That was the beginning. And
said, "The problem is not how much
lifting that muscle does. The problem is
getting what's on top of that muscle off
of there if you want to get a six-pack."
And I kind of feel like that coming into
April 2nd, there is a six-pack of muscle
uh in the economy. It's just we're
layering things on there that make it
hard to see that muscle. And I just want
us to get back to that muscle. Well, you
anticipated my next question, which is
going to be about productivity because I
know you've you've talked a lot over the
years about the role that that plays in,
you know, the inflation picture. So
maybe just unpack for us a little bit
what's happening in the productivity of
our of our workforce. And the thing that
jumps to mind for me certainly is is
artificial intelligence. So maybe just
lay out for us like what you see
happening in productivity and what how
that will or or either will keep us on
that golden path or maybe things that
could move us off of that golden path in
the productivity picture.
>> Okay.
as as you know you talk to the
economists they will tell you this is
the single most important number that
nobody talks about is what's the
productivity growth rate one of the
reasons people don't emphasize the
number as much as they do as much as
they do say CPI or jobs numbers is it's
also the noisiest number among the
noisiest of all the data series that we
have so if you key on well what did the
data show this quarter you it's going to
all over the map. Over a longer run,
there are these productivity trends that
are that can be significant and and
substantial. I started as a skeptic that
it was AI
um because AI is just not big enough.
But I will say we had folks here at
Chicago Fed doing research. what
industries had the biggest increase in
productivity growth from before CO to
after CO and a large fraction of the
ones that had the biggest increase
are AI related they're they're in
technology or they're you big users of
technology and the good news about that
is if it is a technologydriven
productivity boom that can have legs
because that doesn't happen right away
it spreads through the economy. Here's
only shadow. I won't say it's a
downside. It's just a shadow. If we and
we learned this lesson in the '9s.
If the productivity growth boom is
mostly in the future and everybody's
anticipating these productivity
increases and the market is
forward-looking and so they're giving
massive valuations to productivity.
They're counting on the productivity
growth delivering.
You can overheat the economy in the
short run. you can get out far in front
of your skis because suddenly the
entrepreneurs are all rich
>> because they're counting on trillion
dollar improvements in the future. And
we saw in the 2001 recession, everybody
remembers that as the internet bubble
popped and that caused a recession. But
if you I I was working on internet
economics back at that time. It it
should have been impossible. The
internet was not big enough to cause a
recession. It the adoption had not been
enough. And the way it did was
the exuberance of business investing and
of consumers spending out of their newly
acquired stock market wealth. As soon as
the growth rate of the internet, it
became clear it's not going to be 20% a
year. Maybe it'll be 5% a year.
there was a huge overhang and and and a
collapse of confidence. So I just want
to caution us on AI. Let's not repeat
that bubble bubble and bust cycle.
>> So it seems like despite what we
discussed about tariffs, you are
expecting the US economy to to make it
through this path, right? Or you are
expecting the US economy to not tip into
a recession.
>> It's got a six-pack underneath
everything going on. I think it's got a
six-pack under there and I just won.
Let's show the muscle. People still
credibly believe that the when when the
Fed says we're going to get inflation
back to 2% and you go look at what the
market thinks the inflation rate will be
in 10 years is basically 2%. So that
that hasn't moved. I find an encouraging
sign that the world does not think
tariffs are going to blow up everything.
We are going to take a short break and
when we come back we have one very
important question for Austin Goulsby.
[Music]
>> What is one economic trend or blind spot
that's keeping you up at night right
now?
If the if the question is what keeps you
up at night, I always say that the job
of the central bank is to be the night's
watch and not sleep at night because
there shouldn't be anything that goes
wrong that we haven't at least thought
through the possibility and and worked
out a scenario. Now that said, I think
the the nightmare scenario for central
banks is anything that pushes us in a
stagflationary direction, which is to
say employment gets worse at the same
time inflation is rising. And
historically, we think of those as
supply shocks. So if geopolitics start
driving up the price of energy a lot.
But now it's the thing that makes me
nervous about
escalating trade wars and tariffs is
they can have that stagflationary
direction too that they can slow output
at the same time they're driving up
prices.
And that's just not a fun place to be
because there's not a there's not a
wellestablished playbook of well what
should the what should the central bank
do in in response.
>> Thank you so much. This has been great.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
We have a lot to talk about, but first I
want to ask you um something very
important uh to me. You know, when when
the when the Chicago Pope uh ascended uh
in Rome, he made it very clear quickly
where his baseball allegiances were,
which is something very important in
Chicago. He's a White Sox fan. Now, he's
a born and raised Chicago. I know you're
not a native of Chicago, but I just Are
you on the record as as having picked a
a team? Is that something that you have
to do as as kind of the leading economic
voice in the region?
>> I can't profess allegiance to to either
team now, but I am going to throw the
first pitch out at the White Socks game
in August.
>> All right. Congratulations. Telus has
been waiting for an opportunity to bring
up baseball.
>> That's the main reason we called you,
actually.
[Music]